---
title: 'X-PSI: A Python package for neutron star X-ray Pulse Simulation and Inference'
tags:
    - Python
    - astrostatistics
    - neutron stars
authors:
    - name: Thomas E. Riley^[t.e.riley@uva.nl]
    - orcid: 0000-0001-9313-0493
    - affiliation: 1
affiliations:
    name: Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam
    index: 1
date: 01 September 2020
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Stars play host to exotic environments that cannot be simulated in terrestrial
laboratories. The focus of this work is neutron stars, thought to be the most
compact extended objects in the Universe. Observable radiation from neutron
stars encodes information about fundamental physics: gravity, electromagnetism,
and nuclear forces. Neutron stars are often detected by astronomers because
their radiative signal stably pulsates, e.g., a *pulsar* that pulses at radio
wavelengths. Detection is also often because the neutron star contributes to
the generation of some bright transient signal that might either be
catastrophic (e.g., destruction of the neutron star upon merging with another
compact object, generating detectable gravitational wave and/or electromagnetic
signals) or non-catastrophic (e.g., a burst during accretion of matter from a
binary companion). By modeling the physical process that generates data
observed by telescopes astronomers and astrostatisticians make inferential
statements about the nature of the Universe.

# Statement of need

There exist open-source libraries and packages to support a subset of the
modeling treated in astrophysical literature by providing frameworks, toolsets,
model implementations, and so on.  One sub-field for which there does not exist
an open-source project is the modeling of X-ray pulsations generated by the
rotational modulation of asymmetric emission from the surface of a neutron
star. These pulsations can be used to statistically estimate parameters such as
stellar mass and radius using general relativistic gravity. Likelihood
information about such parameters can be used in an array of contexts. A
pertinent one is the post-processing into information about the equation of
state of cold dense matter inside neutron stars. Contemporary and future
telescopes are and will take aim at these pulsing stars: the apt example is the
NICER (Neutron star Interior Composition ExploreR) X-ray telescope, a NASA
payload installed on the International Space Station.

X-PSI is an open-source Python package for Bayesian modeling of time- and
energy-resolved X-ray pulsations. X-PSI provides a framework for the
implementation of custom likelihood and prior functions, and the coupling of
the resulting model open-source statistical sampling software for use on
high-performance computing systems. Notably, X-PSI has and is being implemented 
by the NICER collaboration for pulse-profile modeling of rotation-powered
millisecond pulsars.

The numerical likelihood routines native to X-PSI are written in Cython, and
are dependent on the GNU Scientific Library (GSL). High-level object-oriented
model construction and interfacing with sampling software are performed by a
user in the Python language. X-PSI is Unix source code compatible, and release
versions are freely available on GitHub under the MIT license.
